well you're at home scrolling through
the feed
watching some videos when oh
the power goes out no big deal phone's
still working until the battery runs out
but sooner or later you'll wonder
why won't the toilet flush with the
electricity out
it's not like commodes are plugged into
an outlet right there in the bathroom
wall
when you pull the flush handle a large
flow of water rushes from the tank into
the bowl
it works just by the force of gravity if
your house has a gravity-fed waste
removal system
while gravity is always at our service
unless your toilet's in space
there's one problem with no power the
tank doesn't get
filled the quick solution flush the bowl
manually
by pouring a bucket of water into it
when the power comes back
the water will fill the tank again
you'll probably
be in more of a pickle if your water
removal system is powered by electricity
with this system the waste goes through
the pipes and gathers in a chamber
it needs an electric pump to transfer it
into the sewer
so if you don't want to find yourself in
an embarrassing situation
consider getting an emergency generator
the way your plumbing works
also depends on your water source and
where you live
if you're in a private house you'll have
water but it'll flow at a lower pressure
it'll last as long as the city water
tower doesn't run out
similar thing if you use well water
you'll have some time to finish your
business
while using water left in the reservoir
filling up a cistern requires a pump
and that's run on yep electricity
unfortunately
and if you live in an apartment complex
the water will stop
right after the outage most high rises
get water up to each apartment
thanks to pumps in the basement and you
know about the problems with electric
driven pumps by now
the plumbing system in high rises is so
complicated
there are even legends about it one of
them says
if all the toilets were flushed at the
same time it could take down the
building
it actually won't do anything because
skyscrapers don't rely on one plumbing
system
it's divided into multiple zones that
serve certain parts
and the stress is spread among them
another myth about toilets
is that the water in the bowl swirls the
other way in australia
because of the coriolis effect
this does affect how air moves so
hurricanes spin
counterclockwise in the northern
hemisphere and clockwise in the southern
hemisphere
but the coriolis effect is too weak to
have any impact on your bathroom
the direction of the flush depends only
on the toilet's design
but back to power outages can you shower
during them
yes but only if you use a traditional
tank style water heater
if the tank is full and the water is
already hot you're good to take a shower
but don't wait too long without power
the water will stay warm for
only a couple of hours and if the power
is going to be out for a while
it's better to use water more sparingly
some toilets don't even need water at
least not much of it
they use a vacuum instead so the
contents in the bowl
go into the pipe with the force of
suction on airplanes
the high pressure cabin air literally
pushes the stuff
down into the holding tank vacuum
toilets use only a small amount of water
and sanitizer that rinses and disinfects
the bowl
it saves electricity thus saving weight
on planes
but it also depends on electricity using
a restroom in space
is a whole nother experience instead of
a wc
astronauts use a wcs which stands for
waste collection system to handle the
waste in zero-g
a suction system is used to send it to a
special container
after that sophisticated equipment turns
the liquid waste
into wait for it drinkable water
another astonishing engineering idea is
to make toilets themselves an
energy source one industrial design
student created a power generator
that makes electricity from waste water
as it falls through the pipes
it works like a small hydroelectric dam
inserted in a building's plumbing
the technology isn't meant for private
homes but could be useful
in high-rise and commercial buildings
that might be the future
but let's quickly look at your toilets
long past
the earliest private latrines are at
least 5 000 years old
ancient civilizations would carry away
waste using a stream of water
the ancient romans were known for their
surprisingly advanced sewage systems
public latrines became places to
socialize with others
which seems pretty bizarre when you
think about it today
the forerunner to the modern flush
toilet was invented in 1596 by
sir john harrington queen elizabeth the
first
godson the design had a two foot deep
oval bowl
that was rinsed cleaned by water rushing
from a cistern above
in the 1860s and 70s parisians could do
their business without leaving the
street
there were more than 1200 open-air
bathrooms around the city
some of them were so pretty they were
considered works of art
you can still find the last of them on
boulevard arago
in the 1880s british manufacturer thomas
william
twyford introduced the first all-ceramic
free standing toilet
back then the bowls could be intricately
designed and painted
not like the smooth stark white ones we
have today
the first successful lines of flush
toilets were manufactured by
thomas crapper yep he didn't invent the
commode as many people believe
but he put all the best engineering
ideas together
and added some new improvements like the
tank-filling mechanism that's still used
today
each culture has its bathroom traditions
and sometimes it can be confusing when
you travel to a different country
many visitors can't figure out japanese
toilets
because they're so high-tech they have
buttons to lift the lid
warm the seat turn on the dryer or
sprayer
play some music and somewhere along all
those buttons
is the flusher don't forget to bring
your own tp
and hand sanitizer when visiting cuba
you won't find these
hot commodities in most public restrooms
there
you better bring your wallet into the
bathroom in sweden you have to pay
to use the toilets in larger cities the
money goes into the restroom's upkeep
and maintenance
there's also a theory that people take
better care of the place after spending
some money to get in
for obvious reasons antarctica doesn't
have the type of sewage system we're
used to
people working on the icy continent
collect waste
and burn it in incinerators now i'm just
guessing here that it would be worse to
be icy
and incontinent you think did you notice
how the doors of toilet stalls don't
reach the floor
that space helps you see if the stall is
occupied
or in case the person inside needs
emergency medical assistance
the shorter walls and doors have much
better ventilation too
so lucky for us smells dissipate faster
you won't find a lid on many public
toilets either just the seat
for one most places don't keep them
because they're prone to breaking
since we all use our feet to kick them
open plus
for whatever reason who knows but some
people like to take
toilet lids from public restrooms
too bad too because it's better to put
the lid down each time you flush
the reason the dreaded toilet plume
when you flush a toilet the gurgling
swirling water
sends microscopic particles of waste
shooting up in the air
mixing with the air you breathe and
covering all nearby surfaces
that includes the toilet paper holder
the bathroom countertop
the walls the floor and the ceiling hey
we're all germaphobes in public
restrooms yet nobody's pushing the
elevator button with their foot
strange since there are 40 times more
germs on that button
than on a public toilet seat